During Ravelin's last on-site PCI assessment, our assessor recommended to me looking into becoming a PCI ISA. Sure, why not? I'm sure that's a very sensible thing to do! But erm, wait... what is an ISA? 

## PCI ISA Certification
ISA's, or *Internal Security Assessors*, are trained both in the contents of the PCI-DSS specification, and also in the practicalities of how PCI-DSS assessments are performed; how requirements should be tested, how evidence should be provided, how SAQs and ROCs should be completed, how compensating controls should be determined and documented, how reporting on compliance should be performed. They are able to have informed deliberation with a QSA (Qualified Security Assessor) during on-site assessments, and work with internal teams to help ensure in-scope solutions are PCI-DSS compliant. 

While they are trained as an assessor, an ISA probably won't be able to complete and submit your ROC (Report on Compliance) themselves; for Level 1 Merchants and Service Providers, a QSA will still be required. That isn't the sole intention of the ISA qualification. Instead, the focus is much more on encouraging individuals inside merchants and service providers to understand their PCI compliance better, in order to assist the QSA both before and during an assessment.

On my course, it seemed the participants seeking ISA certification were a mixture of audit and technical staff, but even those with more administrative roles had a solid understanding of the technical elements of the spec (crypto/network security/infosec practices). Think Software Engineers, Compliance Managers, CISOs, Engineering Managers etc, most roles that have to regularly consider PCI compliance in their role could be a good candidate for becoming an ISA.

#### ISA vs QSA
Unlike QSAs (Qualified Security Assessors), an ISA's remit is entirely contained to their own organisation, to the extent that once you leave your current org, you actually also relinquish your ISA qualification. You can't contribute to the assessment process for any organisations other than your own. This means the requirements for becoming a QSA are more involved (QSAs need to possess other infosec certifications, while there are no equivalent requirements for QSAs).

Generally, QSAs audit for a living, and will do so for a company that specialies in IT/infosec auditing and assessment services.

#### ISA vs PCIP
The PCI Professional qualification is a 'less involved' certification, the entry-level qualification that doesn't really touch the assessment process and instead focuses more on the spec itself, and in less detail. 

QSA's can actually just pay the council a bit of money and they'll give you a PCIP qualification without sitting the exam, since you've already demonstrated a level of understanding the exceeds the PCIP training. Might be an option for staff inside merchants in the lower reporting levels or who are SAQ-A/AEP.

So basically, `QSA > ISA > PCIP`.

## Members Only
Before you can begin the training to become an ISA, your company needs to register (and pay $$$) to become a PCI Sponsor organisation. I believe the intent here is to encourage a community and relationship both between organisations invested in the PCI spec and the council, but it is a bit of an artificial tax on entry; don't forget you'll need to pay a renewal fee to maintain your 'sponsor' classification, as well as the individual training and recertification costs per individual. For smaller orgs, those costs are possibly quite prohibitive for a qualification that may not replace your on-site assessment and it's associated costs. For huge orgs, I'm sure these qualify as negligible costs, and I'm sure they do help maintain the council.

## Phase 1: Online Training
Once you've paid up, the first individual step towards ISA certification is the online 'Fundamentals' course. Even if you're familiar with PCI, you might usually approach the topic with a focus towards the requirements of _your_ organisation. This course is a great resource to fill in those gaps and expose you to areas like the P2PE standards or requirements for different SAQs/reporting levels you won't have had to consider before. Yeah it's pretty long and very dry, but also super valuable, worth taking the time to sit through it all.

## Phase 2: Online Exam
Yep, you've gotta pass an online exam before you're allowed to attend the on-site training. It's multiple choice, and you can do it wherever, whenever, which essentially means it's open book. Sitting with a spec to hand and after recently finishing the 'Fundamentals' course, you'll be almost sure to pass. The PCI portal in general feels very dated, but the app for performing the exam was actually well designed; you get to do a quick tutorial which goes over the features available to you during the exam like bookmarking/notes/timer and the UX was intuitive.

For my exam, there were multiple questions on time-based requirements (a recurring theme in these exams because they are so easy to test), a few questions on determining the appropriate SAQ, general questions on the card payment process (roles, steps involved etc) and also some more technical questions about firewalls and network segmentation (again, a recurring theme, assumedly because they are so integral to the spec).

Decide on a strategy to employ to maximise your time. Bookmark the harder questions. Be familiar with the spec so you can quickly navigate to relevant sections. Make sure you've got an uninterrupted 75 minutes to complete it. Passing grade is 75%, which is going to be easy to anyone invested in the process.

## Phase 3: On-site Training
I love me some PCI, so 2 days of on-site training, delivered by a member of staff who actually works for the council, was the definite highlight of the process. While spectre of the exam loomed over the sessions (remember all that $$ your org spent to get you in the door?), the training does help to justify those costs even if you did fail the final exam. Our instructor was super informative, always open to questions (of which there were tons, mostly relating to experiences us ISA trainees had encountered in our respective orgs) and there was a workbook with some interesting case-studies and exercises for us to work through both as a group during the sessions, but also as individual exam prep between the two days.

If you hate PCI, sure, you'll probably be bored stiff. There is no 'new' material here; it is all similar to the online 'Fundamentals' course you've already completed and the spec/supplementary materials you could just read in your own time. The interesting aspect (and what we spent the majority of the time one) is in the minor details, the minutia of the wording of requirements (like 'immediately' vs 'promptly'), motivations behind certain points that might seem unintuitive, the history of changes etc; all the wider context that informs the councils motivations and the contents of the spec. It's a very holistic approach, we discussed technical implementations, interview techniques, things to memorise for the exam, crazy case-studies, anecdotes from past assessments/companies; if you engage, you'll definitely have an enriched understanding of the world of PCI, which easily translates into helping your organisation achieve their compliance.

## Phase 4: The On-site Exam
It all boils down to this. An hour and a half, 75 questions, multiple choice, closed book. This one was pencil and paper rather than on a PC. Hopefully you will have memorised all the time-based requirements, and have a good sense for the wording of many of the requirements (particularly 1,2,3 and 4). As it is multiple choice, your instinct should lead you toward a correct answer in most cases, but do be prepared for some tricky questions. Out of the 75 questions, at least 30-40 should be sure-fire; things you've memorised or just 'easier' questions or those with only one sensible answer. Of the rest, the process of elimination will see you through the majority of the rest. 

When you're studying, try and pay attention to the *tone* of the spec. Note places that are very rigidly defined (like the first requirement), and areas that a more loose (like 5 or 6). If the spec uses the word 'must' take a note. Conversely, if there is a 'should' or options (like in anti-virus policies, network segmentation or protecting public facing web apps), try and understand why these elements are more flexible and bare that in mind when considering your answers. 

I wouldn't say the exam was easy, but it is completely passable for anyone who has taken this process seriously through to the end. Being multiple choice, I'd reckon most participants will pass, and many will do so with near perfect scores. I left the room feeling cautiously optimistic, but when I got a chance to reference the spec to cross-check some of the trickier questions, it was clear that I'd always managed to pick the write option of the 4. I didn't get my actual score back, just a simple email informing me I'd passed (which I received the next day, though they advertised the turn-around was 'within 2 weeks').

## So now I'm a PCI ISA, yey!
Next time I'm sitting in a PCI audit, I know for sure I'm going to feel infinitely better prepared. I can honestly say I feel like 'I know my stuff' know, where as before there was a lingering fear of unknown unknowns that could materialise out of thin air and jeopardise compliance. The training forces you to cover every inch of the spec, leaving no room for requirements or testing procedures to sneak by unseen. That confidence is invaluable, and was ultimately the main benefit of me earning the qualification.

I'd recommend the process to anyone responsible for their compliance who wants to feel a greater sense of certainty in their solutions and their recommendations. And yeah, I'd even describe the whole thing as fun, though I'm sure not all will share my enjoyment of PCI DSS <3